once around ITA Karina so ITA Karina is
a star in the southern hemisphere which
I'm sure some of you will be pleased to
hear since there have been a number of
requests for such an object and I chose
this one because it's an absolutely
fascinating Beast so where is it well
it's in the constellation of Karina and
it's a fairly modest looking star to the
naked eye and uh you can find it using
the star map that we've got here it's
ringed in red over in amongst all those
star fields that down um around getting
on for
60°
declination South so minus 60 this means
that you can't see it from a lot of the
northern hemisphere you have to be south
of 30° north around about the latitude
of Cairo in order to see it at all but
if you're well into the southern
hemisphere if you're below 30° South
then you will see it all the time it'll
be circumpolar around the south southern
pole it lies within a very large Dusty
nebula this is the Karina nebula which
you can see in the image here first
spotted from the Cape of Good Hope by
astronomers in 1752 the southern Sky
wasn't really explored very well until
then and in addition to all that gas and
dust and a lot of very hot young Stars
you've got the Karina ob1
Association an ob1 association is uh a
collection of O and B Class Stars the
biggest type of main sequence Stars the
uh blue hot giant stars and there's a
number of star clusters open clusters
you can see one to the middle left there
and there's another one to the uh middle
right of the image and several very very
powerful Stars the wolf ret
Stars wolf R stars are so powerful and
so massive they tend to blow away all of
their outer envelope depleting them of
hydrogen so that their Spectrum looks
very peculiar you see the inner helium
that's already built inside a shell
so one of those clusters is trumpler 16
very young cluster under a million years
old this entire area is full of newly
made Stars built out of all this gas and
dust that has been getting together and
collapsing under its gravity and one of
the stars that you can see there is wr25
a will fread star 100 times the mass of
our sun 2 million times the power power
output and with a surface temperature of
50,000 de so a lot of the light that's
coming out you can't see because it's in
the ultraviolet um it's gone Way Beyond
blue hot it's now UV hot and uh a very
very shortlived but powerful star and of
course EA Karina itself which we'll talk
about in more detail and that's even
more powerful 4 million times the total
power output of the
sun now this uh area was imaged by the
good James web Space Telescope and
produced this Cosmic Cliffs image which
is absolutely fantastic let's bring it
up a bit larger it's just awesome
showing all that gas and dust and all of
the uh stars in and around that have
been manufactured by it it's just a
amazing photograph but if you zoom right
in on eer Karina you find this strange
double lobed uh Affair where a a giant
eruption of material has taken place and
blown these two spheres down the polar
axis of uh an amazing amount of material
that's been ejected from the star in the
center there and we've got an infrared
image of that central region Zoom zoomed
right in where you can see the very
bright object deep in the center of the
uh expanding cloud of
material now we can look at it in other
wavelengths the left hand picture is
ultraviolet again showing that structure
and an earlier ring of material that
appears to have resulted perhaps from an
earlier outpouring of material and then
we've got an x-ray picture showing just
how there are some very high temperature
going on in the uh cloud and in the Star
right in the center there because we're
getting these very powerful high energy
x-rays from
it now deep in the center very hard to
see what's going on but we think there
are two stars there we're reasonably
sure that it's a double star system in a
fairly long thin elliptical orbit
Arrangement and uh originally it was
estimated it was going around
about
5.5 years for the period of these two
stars but as I say we can't quite see
the stars themselves it would be superb
if we could because if you can see two
stars orbiting around their Common
Center of mass like this you can learn a
lot you can find out what the masses of
the two stars are accurately and do all
kinds of other um
calculations but what we believe at this
point is that the larger star eer Karina
a is so massive it probably is a
luminous blue variable um began with
more than 200 somewhere between 150 and
250 times the mass of the Sun and is
probably lost by these periods of
ejection of material and its extremely
powerful solar wind 30 times the mass of
the sun has already been ejected from it
a quite an incredibly violent
situation and that violence is likely to
continue because we think it's going to
blow up as a supernova and this is
astronomically speaking soon the star
really at this sort of mass won't live
very long at all we think that the life
cycle of such a beast is probably only 3
million years and the you know it's
probably start started at least a
million years ago so astronomically
speaking it's only got around 2 million
years left before it will come to the
violent end as a supernova so you can
see this graphic showing how it grows
from fusing hydrogen to helium and then
helium to carbon and then ends up
building the other elements into an
onion structure with a an iron core and
then uh it collapses in the core down
and we think that such massive stars May
well collapse down to a black hole the
exact outcome of this depends on its
mass and on uh how much of the heavy
elements there are already present in
the envelope and it might well be
affected by all of the material around
it and the uh presence of its companion
the be Star as
well now it's far enough away it's about
7,500 light years way so that a
supernova at that distance would be
fairly spectacular it would Light Up the
Sky a bit like Venus does at about
magnitude minus 4 perhaps um and be
easily visible for a while for the
requisite 100 days or so while it
dissipates but probably wouldn't cause
too many bad effects on Earth although
this one could be a particularly violent
one especially with the interaction with
the enormous amount of material that
it's already ejected and might really be
classified as a potential
hypernova even larger than a classic
core collapse Supernova and then if that
were the case it might interfere with
some of our satellite Communications and
perhaps do some damage to the ozone
layer but we don't really expect the
damage to be significant now you can
also see on the diagram the enormous jet
coming out of the black hole along the
spin axxis in the graphic um and we are
sure that the spin axis does not point
at Earth so any such Jets or gamma ray
bursts uh caused when this thing blows
up will not be coming our
way its companion star the small star is
still somewhere in the range 30 to 80
solar masses this is still a Whopper in
its own right and O type star classed as
one of the largest groups of stars of
all um and it too will live for less
than 10 million years before it too
explodes as a supernova left to its own
devices but the interaction with its
companion May well Doom it sooner than
that uh so a short and violent
life and speaking of the violence in the
system back in 1837 what really got
everybody's attention was that EA Karina
suddenly brightened right up from
obscurity up to um being one of the
brightest stars in the sky it went from
magnitude four so visible but not
spectacular to being brighter than Riel
in Orion which is a magnitude zero star
and so that was very powerful indeed and
the light curve is shown on the right
hand side here with the enormously high
peak for all those measurements but then
it declined back down again and by uh
1843 um it was and its peak and dropped
by 1856 to below naked eye visibility so
you couldn't see it at all at that stage
but then in 1892 it came back to being
visible just at magnitude 6 because
there was a second smaller Outburst
again shown as that second little Peak
on the light curve there
now interestingly we think that these
outbursts and the E ejecting of so much
mass out into the nebula has affected
the orbit so the latest estimates of the
orbit are that it's now reduced down to
more like four years rather than the
five and a half caused by the positions
of the Stars moving through and a
influence of frictional drag on their
motion as it's going through all the
material that's been ejected from the
Star so there's definite possibilities
that these two will spiral together if
this sort of process
continues and it's doing it again
because since about 1940 it's been
getting brighter and you can see part of
the light curve here it's uh coming up
to around magnitude 4 now having been
just on the verge of naked eye
visibility in 19 40 and the brightening
is just uh continuing in a slightly
erratic manner but it's uh definitely
showing signs that there's activity
there now when we look at the Spectrum
of this object it's most
peculiar probably because what we're
really seeing is the emission lines from
all the material in the nebula in the
cloud of gas around it so the radiation
coming from these hot stars is lighting
up the cloud of gas as shown by that
Hubble image on the left taken with the
Widefield planetary camera Mark I and
it's producing these emission lines of
helium n nickel iron argon and so forth
that uh make the spectrum of this object
most peculiar and it varies and again
that's a sign that this is the
turbulence and the expansion of the
cloud of material uh Power by the
enormous Stellar winds coming off the
giant stars in the
center and another effect that was of
Interest we've got an animation of it on
the right here is how you can actually
track Visible Changes so what we can see
here is looks like a lot of material
moving across away from the central
region but this isn't moving of material
this is uh a light Echo it's the
reflection of a pulse of light so
suddenly the central region brightened
for a short period of
time and the direct line of sight light
came straight to us and arrived first
and then light that had taken a
different route and reflected back to us
off regions of the cloud where the
combined light travel time of the
diagonal Roots was longer
arrives afterwards and so whilst this
looks like it's moving it's the outward
traveling camera flash this is why you
shouldn't use a flash to take pictures
of things unless they're really close
because the uh Flash from distant
objects will take time to reflect back
to you and here it's B the camera flash
was set off when there was an outburst
of the star 7,500 light years away and
this overall
Cloud material is Light Years wide and
so the longer path can be really quite
severely
delayed we've seen this in a number of
other
objects now we thought that EA Karina
was very very peculiar um it certainly
is in our Milky Way but we have been
tracking down a number of similar
objects that may well be doing the same
thing with these massive stars embedded
in these outpouring nebula um in other
galaxies so we I've been looking at uh
M83 M101 the pin wheel M51 the whirpool
Galaxy and so on the and finding similar
structures so maybe it's not as unusual
as all of that in that it does seem to
occur well at least half a dozen times
in visible rain
so I'll end with this fantastic picture
of What's called the homus nebula
surrounding EA Karina the enormous
outpouring of material um as if it's
desperately trying to explode but just
hasn't quite got there yet and I hope
you've enjoyed that one thanks a lot